WebAuthn Doc 03 - WebAuthn Ceremony APIs (#1726)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: site/docs/v1/tech/apis/webauthn.adoc

This API has been available since 1.41.0
====

> This page contains all of the APIs for managing WebAuthn passkeys, sometimes referred to as credentials, and starting and completing WebAuthn ceremonies.

Reviewer: 🎉 🎉 🎉

The following APIs are provided to manage WebAuthn passkeys.

* <<Retrieve a Passkey>>
* <<Delete a Passkey>>
* <<Import Passkeys>>

=== WebAuthn Registration Ceremony
* <<Start a WebAuthn Passkey Registration>>
* <<Complete a WebAuthn Passkey Registration>>

=== WebAuthn Authentication Ceremony

> * <<Start a WebAuthn Passkey Assertion>>

Reviewer: Or maybe not.

> * <<Start a WebAuthn Passkey Assertion>>

Author: I wasn't sure how to phrase it. Both authentication and assertion use the same start API. I was worried about saying "Start a WebAuthn Passkey Authentication" and someone thinking "but I just want to do an assertion with the passkey grrrr."

I guess the same could be said for the way I have it now. I think using "Authentication" is better because that's what the ceremony is called.

Thoughts?

> * <<Start a WebAuthn Passkey Assertion>>

Reviewer: How about `Start a WebAuthn Passkey Assertion or Authentication`?

Only a status code is available on the Import API, no JSON body will be returned.

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_standard-post-response-codes.adoc[]

== Start a WebAuthn Passkey Registration

> This API is used to start a WebAuthn registration ceremony by providing some details about the current user and the new passkey. The response contains the creation options that will be passed to the authenticator on the client device, including a one-time challenge unique to the current registration ceremony.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This API is used to start a WebAuthn registration ceremony by providing some details about the current user and the new passkey. The response is a JSON object which is suitable to be passed to the WebAuthn JavaScript API and includes a one-time challenge unique to the current registration ceremony.
```

Any chance we can do the arraybuffer transforms in our output? That would be helpful for folks doing an integration (call the FusionAuth API, then plug the results directly into WebAuthn).

Author: It needs to be base64url-encoded to avoid encoding issues in-flight. I'm not sure how we would send/receive `ArrayBuffer`s on APIs.

I will provide sample JavaScript for doing the transformation. It's just a few lines each way.

Reviewer: Perfect.

=== Request

[.api-authentication]
link:/docs/v1/tech/apis/authentication#api-key-authentication[icon:lock[type=fas]] Start a WebAuthn Registration Ceremony and Retrieve Passkey Creation Options
[.endpoint]
.URI
--
[method]#POST# [uri]#/api/webauthn/register/start#
--

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_x-fusionauth-tenant-id-header-scoped-operation.adoc[]

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_webauthn-register-start-request-body.adoc[]

=== Response

> The response for this API contains the WebAuthn passkey creation options that are passed to the WebAuthn API on the client. A few fields on the API response are returned as a base64url-encoded string and need to be converted to an `ArrayBuffer` in JavaScript before being passed to the WebAuthn client API.

Reviewer: See comment above, would be nice if we could convert to an ArrayBuffer.

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_standard-post-response-codes.adoc[]

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_webauthn-register-start-response-body.adoc[]

== Complete a WebAuthn Passkey Registration

This API is used to complete a WebAuthn registration ceremony by providing the values returned from the WebAuthn client API call. The API will validate the request against configured passkey requirements for the workflow and the one-time challenge generated and returned by <<Start a WebAuthn Passkey Registration>>.

=== Request

[.api-authentication]

> link:/docs/v1/tech/apis/authentication#api-key-authentication[icon:unlock[type=fas]] Complete a WebAuthn Registration Ceremony and Return Passkey Details

Reviewer: ```suggestion
link:/docs/v1/tech/apis/authentication#no-authentication-required[icon:unlock[type=fas]] Complete a WebAuthn Registration Ceremony and Return Passkey Details
```

[.endpoint]
.URI
--
[method]#POST# [uri]#/api/webauthn/register/complete#
--

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_x-fusionauth-tenant-id-header-scoped-operation.adoc[]

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_webauthn-register-complete-request-body.adoc[]

=== Response

:omit_missing_header:
include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_standard-post-response-codes.adoc[]
:omit_missing_header!:

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_webauthn-response-body.adoc[]

== Start a WebAuthn Passkey Authentication

> This API is used to start a WebAuthn authentication ceremony by providing some details about the current user and the new passkey. The response contains the request options that will be passed to the authenticator on the client device, including a one-time challenge unique to the current ceremony.

Reviewer: @spwitt I think this is really important to be clear here. 

What you are doing with this API call is generating some options to be passed to the WebAuthn navigator.credentials.get() function call, correct?

Reviewer: Similar to what you put in the registration API intro text.

=== Request

[.api-authentication]

> link:/docs/v1/tech/apis/authentication#api-key-authentication[icon:lock[type=fas]] Start a WebAuthn Authentication Ceremony and Retrieve Passkey Request Options

Reviewer: Why does this require an API key?

Author: We followed the pattern on passwordless. The APIs to start a WebAuthn ceremony require an API key. I think partly to prevent spamming the endpoint.

The APIs to complete a WebAuthn ceremony do not require an API key because the `challenge` provides another way to validate that the request is legitimate.

Reviewer: Thanks!

[.endpoint]
.URI
--
[method]#POST# [uri]#/api/webauthn/start#
--

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_x-fusionauth-tenant-id-header-scoped-operation.adoc[]

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_webauthn-authenticate-start-request-body.adoc[]

=== Response

> The response for this API contains the WebAuthn passkey request options that are passed to the WebAuthn API on the client. A few fields on the API response are returned as a base64url-encoded string and need to be converted to an `ArrayBuffer` in JavaScript before being passed to the WebAuthn client API.

Reviewer: See above comment about ArrayBuffer.

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_standard-post-response-codes.adoc[]

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_webauthn-authenticate-start-response-body.adoc[]

== Complete a WebAuthn Passkey Authentication
This API is used to complete a WebAuthn authentication ceremony by providing the values returned from the WebAuthn client API call. The API will validate the request against configured passkey requirements for the workflow and the one-time challenge generated and returned by <<Start a WebAuthn Passkey Assertion>>.

=== Request

[.api-authentication]

> link:/docs/v1/tech/apis/authentication#api-key-authentication[icon:unlock[type=fas]] Complete a WebAuthn Authentication Ceremony

Reviewer: ```suggestion
link:/docs/v1/tech/apis/authentication#no-authentication-required[icon:unlock[type=fas]] Complete a WebAuthn Authentication Ceremony
```

Reviewer: Or maybe it requires an API key? Hard to follow the inheritance tree.

Author: Should the `unlock` icon always go to `#no-authentication-required` and the `lock` icon always go to `#api-key-authentication`?

I see inconsistencies on some API pages like Login and Passwordless (where I copied from).

Reviewer: yes. We should fix those inconsistencies. 

It's not great UX, but if you click on the icon, you should be taken to more details about whatever form of authentication is required.

[.endpoint]
.URI
--
[method]#POST# [uri]#/api/webauthn/login#
--

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_x-fusionauth-tenant-id-header-scoped-operation.adoc[]

==== Request Cookies

[.api]
[field]#fusionauth.trust# [type]#[String]# [optional]#Optional#::
The Multi-Factor Trust identifier returned by the Multi-Factor Login API response. This value be may be provided to bypass the Multi-Factor challenge when a User has Multi-Factor enabled. When this cookie exists on the request it will take precedence over the [field]#twoFactorTrustId# if provided in the request body.

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_webauthn-authenticate-complete-request-body.adoc[]

=== Response
The response for this API contains the User object.

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_login-response-codes.adoc[]

> :login_response:

Reviewer: Is a 503 response possible?

Author: I doubt it. Is there another include that doesn't have that status code? It seems like every one of the standard API response code includes has the 503.

The only places I see it used are for device grant and failing to generate an external Id. And then the message that comes with the 503 everywhere doesn't make sense.

Reviewer: My understanding is that a 503 response is only possible when a search index is used (so looking up anything in elasticsearch). Any prime action where `service-unavailable` is returned or the ServiceUnavailableException is thrown. But that may be a bigger fish to fry because I'm not quite sure that is correct.

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_user-response-body.adoc[]
:login_response!:

== Complete a WebAuthn Passkey Assertion
This API is used to validate a WebAuthn authentication ceremony by providing the values returned from the WebAuthn client API call, but it does not authenticate the user. This API can be used to confirm that a user has access to a particular passkey without authenticating them.

=== Request

[.api-authentication]

> link:/docs/v1/tech/apis/authentication#api-key-authentication[icon:unlock[type=fas]] Assert a WebAuthn Authentication Ceremony

Reviewer: ```suggestion
link:/docs/v1/tech/apis/authentication#no-authentication-required[icon:unlock[type=fas]] Assert a WebAuthn Authentication Ceremony
```

[.endpoint]
.URI
--
[method]#POST# [uri]#/api/webauthn/assert#
--

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_x-fusionauth-tenant-id-header-scoped-operation.adoc[]

include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_webauthn-authenticate-complete-request-body.adoc[]

=== Response
The response for this API contains the WebAuthn passkey used to complete the assertion.

:omit_missing_header:
include::docs/v1/tech/apis/_standard-post-response-codes.adoc[]
:omit_missing_header!:

> 

Reviewer: The title of this JSON was a bit discordant.

----
function base64URLToBuffer(base64URL) {
    const base64 = base64URL.replace(/-/g, '+').replace(/_/g, '/');
    const padLen = (4 - (base64.length % 4)) % 4;
    return Uint8Array.from(atob(base64.padEnd(base64.length + padLen, '=')), c => c.charCodeAt(0));
}
----

Fields that require this conversion are documented in the <<Start a WebAuthn Passkey Registration>> and <<Start a WebAuthn Passkey Assertion or Authentication>> response sections.

=== Converting `ArrayBuffer` to base64url-encoded String
Converting ``ArrayBuffer``s to base64url-encoded strings is required before the responses from the https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Authentication_API[WebAuthn JavaScript APIs] are sent to FusionAuth's <<Complete a WebAuthn Passkey Registration>>, <<Complete a WebAuthn Passkey Authentication>>, or <<Complete a WebAuthn Passkey Assertion>> APIs. The FusionAuth hosted pages will perform this conversion as necessary. If you need to perform this conversion yourself, you can use the following JavaScript function.

[source,javascript]
.Function to convert an `ArrayBuffer` to a base64url-encoded string
----

> function bufferToBase64URL(buffer) {

Reviewer: These are great. Only feedback would be to put them into a separate repo so that they can be unit tested by a GH action. You can import values from a separate repo like so:

```
[source,yaml,title=docker-compose.yml]
----
include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-containers/master/docker/fusionauth/docker-compose.yml[]
----
```

But that's a nit.

Author: Do we have a repo that would fit into?
